2023 update (#10)
aeternity/hyperchains-whitepaper: existing-solutions.tex

\section{Existing solutions}

In this section, we describe the existing approaches to the problem along with
the problems they face and how they attempt to address them.

\subsection{Proof of Work}

> Proof of Work (or shortly PoW) solves the problem of decision making by forcing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proof of Work (PoW) addresses the problem of decision making by forcing
```
shortly implies soon, rather than smaller. Could also put (or PoW for short), but the meaning is clear without.

the users (here called miners) to solve some hard computational puzzle to
validate (here, mine) blocks\cite{bitcoin}. The point is to make it hard to

> dominate the network by a single selfish entity. This solution works as long as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dominate the network by a single selfish entity. This approach works as long as
```

nobody holds over 50\% of the whole computational power, in which case they
could fork the chain at any point and get ahead of the main history line. This
is a serious issue since in most protocols the most difficult chain is
considered the proper one. Therefore one needs a lot of participants in the

> network to make it reasonably safe. Moreover, this solution leads to extreme

Reviewer: ```suggestion
network to make it reasonably safe. Moreover, this approach leads to extreme
```

waste of energy and huge costs — according to some measurements, the whole

> blockchain environment burns enough energy to power the whole

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blockchain environment burns enough energy to power all of
```

Denmark\cite{bitcoin_energy}.

This idea does not scale well — it is almost impossible to create a public
network from scratch that would not eventually be dominated by some malicious
entity. A lot of existing serious blockchains suffer this
problem\cite{51attack}. On the other hand, a network becomes extremely secure
once it is popular enough.

\subsection{Proof of Stake}

While PoW distributes the leadership based on computational power, PoS does it
based on so–called stake, which in most cases means token supply, sometimes with
additional tweaks\cite{peercoin}\cite{cryptocurr_without_pow}. The idea is to
create a leadership voting system which is activated periodically. Each time an
election event occurs, the new leader is randomly selected from the stakeholders
(called delegates). The chance of winning an election is proportional to the

> size of one's stake. This approach does not imply any noticeable energetic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
size of one's stake. This approach does not incur any noticeable energetic
```

overhead and therefore is much more friendly to the environment. It also does
not require users to have powerful computers to be able to have some involvement
in decision making.

However, PoS comes with some serious issues. First of all, there is the infamous
"nothing at stake"\cite{pos_flaws_nothing} problem, which exploits the lack of
any cost of the actual mining. In this case, there is no downside to staking

> several branches simultaneously in case of a fork.

Reviewer: More generally, the 'nothing at stake' problem can pop up when the attacker is fully willing to burn its stake.

Ensuring that the source of entropy is distributed along the chain, makes all of
the elections entirely deterministic and predictable leading to a strategy known
commonly as "stake grinding," where the dishonest leader tries to rearrange the
transactions to influence the result of the upcoming election.

Next issue is the "long–range attack"\cite{pos_flaws_long}. In the very
beginning, the stake is scattered among a small group of delegates that together
have full control over the chain. After some time, they can cooperate and start
a concurrent chain diverging from the main one. This could lead to nasty frauds
and would destabilize trust over the chain.

On the other hand, there are multiple approaches to deal with these problems.
For instance, to prevent nothing–at–stake, the CASPER protocol introduces a
"wrong voting penalty," which punishes voters who support conflicting
forks\cite{casper}. However, this solution is backed by a finality gadget, which
is located on another blockchain anyway. NXT deals with long–range attack by
forcefully finalizing all blocks that are older than 720 generations\cite{nxt}.

> We believe that this doesn not actually solve the problem, but rather defers it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We believe that this does not actually solve the problem, but rather defers it.
```

Reviewer: Given that Aeternity Mainnet also has forced finality (100 blocks), I would argue that the approach has merit, even if it's not by itself the final answer.

Moreover, it introduces weak subjectivity since one still needs to trust some

> entity while entering the network for the first time or after a longer downtime.

Reviewer: Aeternity complements finality with the ability to roll back and also pin the node to a specific branch. This allows users to take control if they observe that the algorithmic choice of the node results in them actually ending up on the attacker's fork.

Ouroboros staking system has managed to reach solid security, but at the cost of

> very high complexity\cite{ouroboros}.

Reviewer: There is also the more general problem of _stake corruption_, or perhaps _stake collusion_, where the stake distribution may look healthy on the surface, but stakers are actually colluding rather than acting as self-serving actors.

This would be similar to how the superficial assumption in a free market is that actors will prefer what is in their best interest, but their perceived best interest may well be to join a cartel and collude to skew the market dynamics.

Author: Well, we don't address that either. This is inherent to capital-based mining.

Author: Added a section about it

Although these are only few examples, the general argument is that PoS comes
with many problems, which, as they are being solved, eventually introduce new
ones. This undermines reliability of PoS systems, and especially compared to

> mature PoWs.

Reviewer: Of course, HC as proposed is still a PoS system, albeit with some techniques for addressing _some_ of the weaknesses of PoS.

Reviewer 2: It is a hybrid: PoS with a PoW component, so not entirely PoS

Author: Changed wording
